# Mathematical Methods II

$
\newcommand\C{\mathbb{C}}
\newcommand\R{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand\Q{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand\Z{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand\N{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand\ve[1]{\boldsymbol{#1}}
\newcommand\x{\ve{x}}
\newcommand\r{\ve{r}}
\newcommand\ppx[1]{\frac{\partial #1}{\partial x}}
\newcommand\ppt[1]{\frac{\partial #1}{\partial t}}
\newcommand\pp[3][]{\frac{\partial^{#1}{#2}}{\partial {#3}^{#1}}}
\newcommand\ddx[1]{\frac{d #1}{d x}}
\newcommand\ddt[1]{\frac{d #1}{d t}}
\newcommand\dd[3][]{\frac{d^{#1}{#2}}{d {#3}^{#1}}}
\newcommand\norm[1]{\left\lVert#1\right\rVert}
\newcommand\grad[1]{\ve{\nabla}#1}
\newcommand\divg[1]{\ve{\nabla}\cdot#1}
\newcommand\curl[1]{\ve{\nabla}\times#1}
\newcommand\lapl[1]{\nabla^2 #1}
\newcommand\E[1]{\langle #1\rangle}
$


## Partial Differential Equations

A partial differential equation typically involves a number of variables $x_1, \dots, x_n$, an unknown multivariable function $u(x_1, \dots, x_n)$ as well as its partial derivatives with respect to these variables.

$$ f\left(x_1, \dots, x_n; u_{x_1}, \dots, u_{x_n}; u_{x_1x_1} \dots, u_{x_1x_n}; \dots\right) = 0. $$

Here, we use the notation
$$ u_{x_i} = \pp{u}{x_i}, \quad u_{x_ix_j} = \pp{}{x_j}\left(\pp{u}{x_i}\right), \quad\dots.$$
We may also use Newton's notation specifically to denote derivatives with respect to time.
$$ \dot{u} = \ppt{u}, \quad \ddot{u} = \pp[2]{u}{t}, \quad\dots. $$

The special operator $\grad{} = \sum \partial/\partial{x_i}\ve{e_i}$ is often used to define the *gradient*, *divergence*, and *Laplacian*  of scalar and vector fields. Let $u(\ve{x})$ be a scalar field and $\ve{q}(\ve{x})$ be a vector field, and let $\{\ve{e_i}\}$ be our standard basis.
$$ \begin{align}
\grad{u} &= \sum_i \pp{u}{x_i} \ve{e_i}. \tag{Gradient} \\
\divg{\ve{q}} &= \sum_i \pp{q_i}{x_i}. \tag{Divergence} \\
\lapl{u} &= \sum_i \pp[2]{u}{x_i}. \tag{Laplacian}
\end{align} $$
Another quantity called the *curl* is only defined in $\R^3$ as follows.
$$ \curl{\ve{q}} = \sum_i \epsilon_{ijk}\pp{q_i}{x_j}\ve{e_k}. 
\tag{Curl} $$

### Wave Equation

$$ \ddot{u} = c^2 \nabla^2{u}. $$
In one dimension, this reduces to
$$ \pp[2]{u}{t} = c^2 \pp[2]{u}{x}. $$

A class of solutions is given by $u(x, t) = A\cos(\omega (t - x/c) + \phi)$.

Solutions in one dimension general look like $f(x - vt)$. This represents a wave travelling in the positive $x$ direction, while $g(x + vt)$ represents a wave travelling in the opposite direction.

Suppose we choose two solutions $\cos(k(x - vt))$ and $\cos(k(x + vt))$. Their sum is simply $2\sin{kx}\sin{kvt}$.
This is called a standing wave, since the nodes do not change with time.

### Heat Equation

$$ \ppt{T} = \alpha^2 \lapl{T}. $$

We start with Fourier's Law, which states that the local heat flux density $\ve{q}$ is related to the gradient of the temperature as $\ve{q} = -\kappa \nabla T$. 
This means that the rate of flow of heat energy per unit area is proportional to the negative gradient of temperature locally, *i.e.* heat flows in the direction of *decreasing* temperature, proportional to the thermal conductivity $\kappa$ of the material, which is a simple scalar for isotropic materials.

The law of conservation of heat tells us that rate of change of internal heat per volume is given by $\nabla\cdot \ve{q} = -\rho\sigma\,(\partial{T}/\partial{t}) = 0$. This means that the rate of flow of heat away from a region is proportional to the rate of *decrease* in temperature of that region with time, *i.e.* loss of heat energy in a volume is directly proportional to the decrease in temperature via $Q = \rho\sigma V\Delta{T}$. Note that $\rho$ is the density of the material and $\sigma$ is its specific heat capacity.
Putting these together and using $\lapl{T} = \divg{\grad{T}}$ yields the result, with $\alpha^2 = \kappa/\rho\sigma$.

In one dimension, this reduces to
$$ \ppt{T} = \alpha^2 \pp[2]{T}{x}. $$

Note that for anisotropic materials, $\kappa$ is a second order tensor and hence doesn't commute with the divergence.
$$ \rho\sigma\ppt{T} = \divg{(\kappa\grad{T})}. $$


#### Diffusion Equation
The heat equation more generally describes the phenomenon of *diffusion*, when $\alpha$ is replaced by a scalar constant $D$ and $T$ is replaced by the density of the diffusing material $\phi$.

$$ \ppt{\phi} = D\lapl{\phi}. $$

#### Random walks
The diffusion equation can also be used to describe the phenomenon of random walks, such as Brownian motion, by setting $\phi = P(\ve{x}, t)$ to the probability of finding the walker at position $\ve{x}$ at time $t$.

Consider a random walk in one dimension, where the walker takes time $\tau$ per step of length $\ell$. The probability $p$ that the walker steps to the right is constant, so the probability $q$ that the walker steps left is simply $1 - p$. In this discrete case, we set $P_n(m)$ to be the probability of finding the walker at position $x = m\ell$ at time $t = n\tau$. Clearly, the walker can arrive at step $m$ only if it stepped rightwards from $m-1$ or leftwards from $m+1$, so
$$ P_{n + 1}(m) = pP_n(m-1) + qP_n(m+1). $$

In the special case that a leftward and rightward step are equally likely, *i.e.* $p = q = 1/2$, 
$$ P_{n+1}(m) - P_n(m) = \frac12(P_n(m+1) - P_n(m)) - \frac12 (P_n(m) - P_n(m - 1)). $$
In the limit of large $n$, we can approximate these quantities as differentials. Thus, using $\delta n = \delta t /\tau$ and $\delta m = \delta x /\ell$, we obtain
$$ \tau\ppt{P} = \frac{\ell^2}{2}\pp[2]{P}{x}. $$

With some rearrangement and setting $\ell^2/2\tau = D$, we identify this as the diffusion equation.

> **Question**: What does this PDE look like for $p \neq q$?  
> *Response*: Note that in the discrete case, the probability function $P_n$ can be shown to form a Binomial distribution $B(a, p)$. This is true because the probability of reaching position $m$ from $0$ in $n$ steps along a single path with $a$ steps to the right and $b = n - a$ steps to the left is simply $p^aq^b$. This is true of every path of this form, of which there are $n!/(a!b!)$. Also, we must have exactly $m$ more steps to the right than to the left, so $a = (n + m)/2$, $b = (n - m)/2$. Thus,
$$ P_n(m) = p_n(a) = \binom{n}{a}\,p^aq^{n-a}. $$
Note that $p_n(a)$ is simply the coefficient of $x^a$ in the binomial expansion $(px + q)^n$, so by setting $x=1$, we verify that the sum of probabilities over all $a$, ranging from $0$ to $n$ is exactly $1$.
The expectation value of the number of rightward steps is simply $\E{a} = np$, so the expected position of the walker is $\E{m} = 2\E{a} - n = n(p - q)$, so $\E{x} = n(p - q)\ell = (p-q)t\ell/\tau = vt$.
$$ v = (p-q)\frac{\ell}{\tau}, \quad\quad D = 2pq\frac{\ell^2}{\tau}. $$
Here, we set $v$ to be the *drift velocity* of the walker.
The variance of $a$ is simply $npq$, so $\E{(m - \E{m})^2} = \E{m^2} - \E{m}^2 = 4npq$. Thus, the variance of the $x$ coordinate is given by $4npq\ell^2 = 4pqt\ell^2/\tau = 2Dt$.

> A famous consequence of this this that when $p = q = 1/2$, the expected value of the squared displacement from the origin is given by $\E{m^2} = n$. Thus, the expected *distance* from the origin is simply $\sqrt{t\ell^2/\tau}$.

> By performing the limit to the continuum $(\ell, \tau) \to (0, 0)$ on the rate equation while keeping $v$ and $D$ constant, we obtain the equation of diffusion
$$ \ppt{P} = -v\ppx{P} + D\pp[2]{P}{x}. $$
One solution of this equation is the Gaussian distribution
$$ P(x, t) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{4\pi Dt}}\exp\left(\frac{-(x - vt)^2}{4Dt}\right), $$
with the initial value $P(x, 0) = \delta(x)$.  
> The above equation is also easily generalized to higher dimensions.

# 

> **Question**: In the limiting process, the ratio $\ell^2/\tau$ is held constant. This seems to imply that the speed/drift velocity of the particle $\ell/\tau$ blows up. How do we reconcile this?

# 

> **Question**: How does this general equation for random walks relate to the diffusion of particles?  
> *Response*: For a large collection of particles performing such a random walk, it is clear that the density of molecules $n(\ve{x}, t)$ is simply proportional to the probability of a molecule being at $(\ve{x}, t)$, so $n(\ve{x}, t) = n_{tot}P(\ve{x}, t)$. We define the current density of particles $\ve{j}(\ve{x}, t)$ and note that analogous to Fourier's law, particles tend to move from regions of higher density to regions of lower density. This is called Fick's law, which states
$$ \ve{j}(\ve{x}, t) = -D\, \grad{n}(\ve{r}, t). $$
The constant streaming of particles with a drift velocity $\ve{v}$ introduces an additional flux term, so 
$$ \ve{j}(\ve{x}, t) = \ve{v}n(\ve{x}, t) - D\, \grad{n}(\ve{r}, t). $$
The conservation of the number of particles is expressed by the continuity equation
$$ \ppt{}n(\ve{x}, t) + \divg{\ve{j}(\ve{x}, t)} = 0. $$
Plugging in the expression for $\ve{j}(\ve{x}, t)$ yields
$$ \ppt{}n(\ve{x}, t) = -\ve{v}\cdot\grad{n(\ve{x}, t)} \,+\, D\,\lapl{n(\ve{x}, t)}. $$

### Laplace's Equation
$$ \lapl{\phi}(\ve{x}) = 0. $$
This equation is often used to describe various physical potentials $\phi(\ve{x})$, such as gravitational or electrostatic potential in regions without matter or charge respectively.

### Poisson's Equation
$$ \lapl{\phi(\ve{x})} = f(\ve{x}). $$
This equation is often used to describe potentials in the presence of some 'source', such as gravitational or electrostatic potentials in the presence of matter or charge. Here, $f(\ve{x})$ is often called the *source density*. Note that this is a special case of the heat equation where the function $T(\ve{x})$ is independent of time.

## Solving PDE's
#### Separation of Variables
Consider the region $D = \{(x, y) \in \R^2 : 0 \leq x \leq a, 0 \leq y \}$. We model the temperature in this region $T(x, y)$ using the PDE
$$ \lapl{T} = \pp[2]{T}{x} + \pp[2]{T}{y} = 0. $$

We first look for *boundary conditions*. Let $T(x, 0) = T_0$
and $T(x, \infty) = T(0, y) = T(a, y) = 0$. These are called *Dirichlet conditions*.

> There are other sorts of boundary conditions too. For example, *Neumann conditions* specify the fluxes (derivatives) at the boundaries instead of the function values.

We assume that the function $T$ can be separated into functions of single variables, *i.e.* $T(x, y) = X(x)Y(y)$.
Thus, our PDE can be written as
$$ \frac{X''(x)}{X(x)} = - \frac{Y''(y)}{Y(y)}. $$

Since both sides are functions of separate variables, they must be constant, say $\lambda$. Thus, we have the system of ODES
$$ X''(x) = \lambda X(x), \quad\quad Y''(y)  = -\lambda Y(y). $$
Now, we use the symmetry of our boundary conditions to conclude that
$$ X(x) = A_x\sin(n\pi x/a), \quad\quad Y(y) = A_y\exp(-n\pi y/a). $$
We have implicitly chosen $\lambda < 0$, specifically $\lambda = -(n\pi/a)^2$.
Note that we have chosen $\exp(-n\pi y/a)$ to satisfy the boundary condition $T(x, y) \to 0$ as $y \to \infty$.

This alone does not solve our equation. Instead, we take a superposition of all such solutions, with $n \in \N$.
Thus,

$$ T(x, y) = \sum_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \sin(n\pi x/a)\exp(-n\pi y/a). $$

Clearly, $T(0, y) = T(a, y) = 0$. Thus, we must choose $A_n$ such that $T(x, 0) = T_0$. Note that
$$ T(x, 0) = \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} A_n\sin(n\pi x/a). $$
Thus,
$$ A_n = \frac{2}{a}\int_0^{a} T(x, 0)\, \sin{n\pi x/a} \:dx \;=\; \frac{2T_0}{n\pi}(1 - \cos(n\pi)). $$

This gives us our solution,

$$ T(x, y) = \sum_{n = 1}^\infty \;\frac{2T_0}{n\pi}(1 - \cos(n\pi)) \sin(n\pi x/a)\exp(-n\pi y/a). $$

<!-- Laplace's Equation in 2D can be elegantly solved using *complex analysis*. Note that all analytic functions satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann equations, so if $f = u + iv$ is analytic, for real functions $u, v$, then $ u_x = v_y$ and $u_y = -v_x$. Thus, $u_{xx} = v_{yx} = v_{xy} = -u_{yy}$, with an analogous process for $v_{xx} = -v_{yy}$. Thus, both $u$ and $v$ satisfy Laplace's equation, and are called *harmonic functions*. Our initial problem thus reduces to finding some analytic function $f$ which satisfies the given boundary conditions. -->

#### Fourier Series

The Fourier series of an integrable function $f$ with period $T$ is given by

$$ f(x) = \frac{a_0}{2} \,+\, \sum_{n = 1}^\infty a_n\cos\frac{n\pi x}{T} \,+\, \sum_{n = 1}^\infty b_n\sin\frac{n\pi x}{T}, $$
where the Fourier coefficients $a_n$ and $b_n$ are given by
$$ a_n = \frac{2}{T} \int_0^T f(x) \cos\frac{n\pi x}{T} \:dx,
\quad\quad b_n = \frac{2}{T} \int_0^T f(x) \sin\frac{n\pi x}{T} \:dx.$$

#### Laplace's Equation on a rectangular domain
Let $f\colon D \to \R$ be defined on the rectangular domain 
$$D = \{(x, y) \in \R^2: 0 \leq x \leq a, 0 \leq y \leq b\}$$
satisfying Laplace's equation on the interior, *i.e.* $$\lapl{f} = 0,$$ and the Dirichlet boundary conditions $f(x, 0) = g(x)$, $f(x, b) = f(0, y) = f(a, y) = 0$, where $g\colon [0, a] \to \R$.

The solution is given by
$$ f(x, y) = \sum_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \sin\frac{n\pi x}{a}\sinh\frac{n\pi(b - y)}{a},$$
where the Fourier coefficients are given by
$$ A_n \sinh\frac{n \pi b}{a} = \frac{2}{a}\int_0^a g(x)\sin\frac{n\pi x}{a} \:dx. $$

### Heat flow equation
We seek a solution $u(\x, t)$ to 
$$ \lapl{u} = \frac{1}{\alpha^2} \ppt{u}. $$
We perform a partial separation of variables by writing $u(\x, t) = F(\x) T(t)$. Thus, the spatial and temporal parts of the PDE separate, yielding
$$ \frac{1}{F} \lapl{F} = \frac{1}{\alpha^2 T} \ddt{T} = -k^2. $$
We choose $-k^2$ to ensure that our solution does not diverge as $t \to \infty$. The temporal part is easily solved as $T(t) = \exp(-k^2\alpha^2 t)$. The spatial part satisfies
$$ \lapl{F} + k^2F = 0. $$
To solve this, we require two boundary (spatial) conditions, as well as an initial (temporal) condition.

Suppose that our problem is one-dimensional, and $u(x, 0) = u_0(x)$, $u(0, t) = 0$ and $u(\ell, t) = 0$.
For example, if we demand a steady state at $t = 0$ with $u(0, 0) = 0$ and $u(\ell, 0) = T_0$, we have the solution to $\partial^2 u /\partial u^2 = 0$,
$$ u_0(x) = T_0 \frac{x}{\ell}. $$

Note that the spatial equation admits solutions of the form $A\cos{kx} + B\sin{kx}$. The cosine part is discarded, and we must have $k = n\pi /\ell$. Thus,
$$ u(x, t) = \sum_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\,\exp\left(-k_n^2\alpha^2 t\right). $$
The coefficients $A_n$ are determined by setting $t = 0$, where $u = u_0$. Thus,
$$ A_n = \frac{2}{\ell}\int_0^\ell u_0(x) \sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\: dx. $$

Suppose that we further demand a steady state as $t \to \infty$, where $u(0, \infty) = T_1$ and $u(\ell, \infty) = T_2$. Then, this steady state has a solution $u_f$ where
$$ u_f(x) = (T_2 - T_1)\frac{x}{\ell} + T_1. $$
Thus, our solution is the superposition
$$ u(x, t) = u_f(x) \,+\, \sum_{n = 1}^\infty B_n \sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\,\exp\left(-k_n^2\alpha^2 t\right). $$
The coefficients $B_n$ are given by
$$ B_n = \frac{2}{\ell}\int_0^\ell (u_0(x) - u_f(x))\sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\: dx. $$

#### Heat flow equation with insulated boundaries
Suppose we are given the Neumann conditions $u'(0, t) = u'(\ell, t) = 0$, together with the initial conditions $u(x, 0) = u_0(x)$. We proceed in the same vein as before, but this time we discard the *sine* part of the spatial solution, since upon differentiation, it becomes a cosine and fails to satisfy the boundary conditions. Thus, we have
$$ u(x, t) = \frac{A_0}{2} \,+\, \sum_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \cos\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\,\exp\left(-k_n^2\alpha^2 t\right). $$

Like before, the coefficients $A_n$ are given by
$$ A_n = \frac{2}{\ell}\int_0^\ell u_0(x) \cos\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\: dx. $$

#### Heat flow equation with periodic boundaries
Suppose we are given that $u(x, 0) = u_0(x)$, $u(-\ell, t) = u(+\ell, t)$, and $u'(-\ell, t) = u'(+\ell, t)$. We perform partial separation of variables as usual, with $T(t) = \exp(-k^2\alpha^2t)$.
Note that $u$ is defined on the domain $[-\ell, +\ell]\times[0, \infty)$.

Our spatial solution $F(x) = c_1\cos{kx} + c_2\sin{kx}$ only satisfies the boundary conditions when $\sin{k\ell} = 0$, thus $k = n\pi/\ell$. We do not however discard any terms here, so our general solution is of the form
$$ u(x, t) = \frac{A_0}{2} \,+\, \sum_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \cos\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\,\exp\left(-k_n^2\alpha^2 t\right)
\,+\, \sum_{n = 1}^\infty B_n \sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\,\exp\left(-k_n^2\alpha^2 t\right). $$

The coefficients $A_n$ and $B_n$ are determined at $t = 0$ as usual.

$$ A_n = \frac{1}{\ell} \int_{-\ell}^{+\ell} u_0(x) \cos\frac{n\pi x}{\ell} \:dx,
\quad\quad B_n = \frac{1}{\ell} \int_{-\ell}^{+\ell} u_0(x) \sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell} \:dx.$$

#### Schr&ouml;dinger equation
$$ -\frac{\hbar^2}{2m}\lapl\Psi(\x, t) + V(\x)\Psi(\x, t) = i\hbar \ppt{} \Psi(\x, t). $$
We perform a partial separation of variables $\Psi(\x, t) = \psi(\x)T(t)$, so
$$ -\frac{\hbar^2}{2m} \frac{1}{\psi}\lapl{\psi} + V = {i\hbar} \frac{1}{T}\ppt{}T = \text{constant } (E). $$
The constant $E$ has an interpretation in terms of energy.
The temporal part is solved by $T(t) = \exp(-iEt/\hbar)$.
The spatial part of the equation becomes
$$ -\frac{\hbar^2}{2m}\lapl{\psi} + V\psi = E\psi, $$
which is called the time-independent Schr&ouml;dinger equation.

Consider the particle in a box problem in one dimension, with $V(x) = 0$ when $0 \leq x \leq \ell$, and $\infty$ everywhere else. The time-independent Schr&ouml;dinger equation is solved by $\psi(x) = A\cos{kx} + B\sin{kx}$, where $k^2 = 2mE/\hbar^2$.

Outside the box, $\Psi$ must vanish. Let our initial conditions be $\Psi(x, 0) = \psi_0(x)$, and let our boundary conditions be $\Psi(0, t) = \Psi(\ell, t) = 0$.
We discard the cosine part of our spatial solution, and must have $k = n\pi/\ell$. Note that we can write
$$ E_n = \frac{\hbar^2 \pi^2 n^2}{2m\ell^2}. $$ Putting this together,
$$ \Psi(x, t) = \sum_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\, \exp(-i E_n t/\hbar). $$
The coefficients $A_n$ are given by
$$ A_n = \frac{2}{\ell}\int_0^\ell \psi_0(x) \sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\: dx. $$

### Wave equation
We seek a solution $u(\x, t)$ to
$$ \lapl{u} = \frac{1}{v^2}\pp[2]{u}{t}. $$
Like before, we perform a partial separation of variables $u(\x, t) = X(\x) T(t)$. Thus,
$$ \frac{1}{X} \lapl{X} = \frac{1}{v^2 T} \dd[2]{T}{t} = -k^2. $$
Suppose our problem is posed in one dimension. Upon setting $kv = \omega$, we obtain the familiar ODEs
$$ \dd[2]{}{x}X + k^2 X = 0, \quad\quad \dd[2]{}{t} T + \omega^2 T = 0. $$
It will turn out that $v$ represents the velocity of the wave, $\lambda = 2\pi /k$ represents the wavelength, and $f = \omega/2\pi$ represents the frequency.

Suppose that the string is tied down at the ends, so $u(0, 0) = u(\ell, 0) = 0$ and we have the initial shape $u(x, 0) = u_0(x)$. This eliminates the cosine term in $X$. Now, if the velocity of the string at $t = 0$ is zero, then we eliminate the sine term in $T$. Thus, we have
$$ u(x, t) = \sum_{n = 1}^\infty A_n\sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\cos\frac{n\pi v t}{\ell}.$$
If instead we were given initial conditions where the velocity of the wave is specified, *i.e.* $u'(x, 0) = v(x)$, and the string is perfectly flat initially, then we have
$$ u(x, t) = \sum_{n = 1}^\infty A_n\sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}\sin\frac{n\pi v t}{\ell}.$$

Consider one of the fundamental solutions in this superposition, which for fixed $x$ is a sinusoidal wave of frequency $f_n = nv/2\ell$. For $n = 1$, this is called the *fundamental tone* and for higher $n$, these are called *harmonics*. Each of these 'separated solutions' is a normal mode, which together forms an eigenbasis of all possible superpositions/solutions.