# Linear Algebra I

$
\newcommand\C{\mathbb{C}}
\newcommand\R{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand\Q{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand\Z{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand\N{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand\ve[1]{\boldsymbol{#1}}
\newcommand\norm[1]{\left\Vert #1 \right\Vert}
\newcommand\u{\ve{u}}
\newcommand\v{\ve{v}}
\newcommand\w{\ve{w}}
$


## Fields
In brief, a field $F$ is a set with two binary operations $+$ and $\times$ such that

- $+$ and $\times$ are commutative.
- $+$ has an additive identity and inverses.
- $\times$ has a multiplicative identity and inverses for non-zero elements.
- $\times$ distributes over $+$.

We also assume that the additive and multiplicative identities are distinct by convention.

Some examples of fields are $\Q$, $\R$, $\C$, $\Q[\sqrt{2}] = \{p + q\sqrt{2} : p, q \in \Q\}$.

The set $\{0, 1\}$ forms a field when $+$ is defined as the $\operatorname{XOR}$ operation and $\times$ is defined as the $\operatorname{AND}$ operation. This is a finite field, called the Galois field of two elements $GF(2)$ or $\Z_2$.

Note that any subfield $F \subset \R$ must contain $\Q$. To see this, note that $0, 1 \in F$. Thus, $F$ contains all positive integers by the closure of addition. The existence of additive inverses means that $F$ also contains the negative integers. Now, every non-zero integer must have a multiplicative inverse, so all rationals of the form $1/q$ are contained in $F$. Scaling these by integers $q \in F$ shows that $F$ contains all numbers of the form $p/q$ for integers $p, q$ where $q \neq 0$. Thus, $\Q \subseteq F$.


## Vector spaces

A *vector space* $V$ over a field $F$ is a set with a binary operation $+\colon V\times V \to V$ and an operation $\cdot\,\colon F\times V \to V$, satisfying the following axioms.

- $\u + \v \in V$ for all $\u, \v \in V$.
- $a\u \in V$ for all $a \in F$, $\u \in V$.
- $\u + \v = \v + \u$ for all $\u, \v \in V$.
- $(\u + \v) + \w = \u + (\v + \w)$ for all $\u, \v, \w \in V$
- There exists $\ve{0} \in V$ such that $\ve{0} + \u = \u = \u + \ve{0}$ for all $\u \in V$.
- For all $\v \in V$, there exists $\u \in V$ such that $\u + \v = \ve{0}$. We denote $\v = - \u$.
- $c(\u + \v) = c\u + c\v$ for all $c \in F$, $\u, \v \in V$.
- $(ab)\u = a (b\u)$ for all $a,b \in F$, $\u \in V$.
- $(a + b)\u = a\u + b\u$ for all $a,b \in F$, $\u \in V$.
- There exists $1 \in F$ such that $1\u = \u$ for all $\u \in V$.

A *vector subspace* $W$ is a subset of a vector space $V$ obeys the following axioms.

- $\u + \v \in W$ for all $\u, \v \in W$.
- $a\u \in W$ for all $a \in F$, $\u \in W$.
- $\ve{0} \in W$, where $\ve{0}$ is the zero element of $V$.

Then, $W$ is itself a vector space, called a subspace of $V$.

Some examples of vector spaces are $\{\ve{0}\}$ over $\R$ (the zero vector space), $\R^n$ over $\R$.

### Matrices as vectors
Consider the set of matrices with real valued entries, $M_{m\times n}(\R)$. With addition defined entrywise with $(0)_{ij}$ as the identity, scalar multiplication defined as $(cA)_{ij} = c(A)_{ij}$, this forms a field over $\R$.

### Functions as vectors
Let $S$ be a set and define
$$ \mathscr{F}(S, \R) = \{f\colon S \to \R\}. $$
We define our operations as follows.

- $(f + g)(s) = f(s) + g(s)$ for all $f, g \in \mathscr{F}(S, \R)$.
- $\ve{0}(s) = 0$ is the additive identity.
- $(cf)(s) = c f(s)$ for all $f \in \mathscr{F}(S, \R)$.

Then $\mathscr{F}(S, \R)$ is a vector space over $\R$.

Note that when $S = \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$, this vector space seems very similar to $\R^n$. Similarly, when $S = \N$, this vector space is simply the set of all sequences of real numbers.

### Polynomials as vectors
Let $P_n(\R)$ be the set of all polynomials with real coefficients and degree at most $n$, where $n \in \Z_{\ge0}$. We note that there is a bijection between such polynomials and the tuples of their coefficients, which are elements of $\R^{n+1}$. Thus, we can show that $P_n(\R)$ is a vector space over $\R$.

Note that $P_n(\R) \subset P_{n+1}(\R)$. The union of all such sets, *i.e.* the set of all real polynomials $P(\R) = \bigcup_{n\geq 0} P_n(\R)$ is also a vector space.