# Linear Algebra I

$
\newcommand\C{\mathbb{C}}
\newcommand\R{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand\Q{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand\Z{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand\N{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand\ve[1]{\boldsymbol{#1}}
\newcommand\norm[1]{\left\Vert #1 \right\Vert}
\def\u{\ve{u}}
\def\v{\ve{v}}
\def\w{\ve{w}}
\def\e{\ve{e}}
\def\span{\operatorname{span}}
\def\Id{\operatorname{Id}}
\def\kernel{\operatorname{ker}}
\def\image{\operatorname{im}}
\def\L{\mathscr{L}}
\def\T{\mathscr{T}}
\def\ev{\operatorname{ev}}
$

## Linear maps
A linear map $T\colon V \to W$ between vector spaces (over a field $F$) is such that $T(\v + \w) = T(\v) + T(\w)$ and $T(\lambda\v) = \lambda T(\v)$ for all $\v, \w \in V$ and scalars $\lambda$.

This immediately forces the following properties.

- $T(\ve0_V) = \ve0_W$
- $T(\lambda_1\v_1 + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n) = \lambda_1T(\v_1) + \dots + \lambda_nT(\v_n)$.

The following are all linear maps.

- **Zero/trivial map**: $$\mathbb{O}\colon V\to W, \quad\v \mapsto \ve0.$$
- **Identity map**: $$\Id\colon V\to V,\quad \v \mapsto \v.$$
- **Scaling**: For some fixed scalar $c$, $$T\colon \R\to\R, \quad x \mapsto cx. $$

> Indeed, *all* linear maps from $\R$ to $\R$ are scaling maps.

- **Dilation**: For some fixed $c \in F$,
$$T\colon V\to V,\quad \v \mapsto c\v.$$
- **Matrices**: For some $A \in M_{m\times n}(\R)$,
$$L_A\colon \R^n\to\R^m,\quad \v\mapsto A\v.$$
- **Reflections**: For example, a reflection of $\R^2$ about the $x$-axis. Note that this is a linear map of order 2, *i.e.* $T\circ T = \Id$. Note that reflections about lines *not* through the origin are not linear maps, since the zero vector must map to itself.
- **Rotations**: As before, the rotation must be about the zero vector.
- **Projections**: For example, the projection of $\R^2$ onto the $x$-axis. Note that projections are of the form $T\circ T = T$.
- **Inclusions**: For example, $$T\colon \R\to\R^2,\quad x\mapsto(x, mx).$$
- **Differentiation**: $$\mathscr{D}\colon P_n(\R) \to P_n(\R), \quad p \mapsto p'.$$
- **Integration**: $$\mathscr{I}\colon C(\R) \to \R, \quad f \mapsto \int_0^1 f(t)\:dt,$$
Another integration map, this time between polynomials is $$\mathscr{I}\colon P(\R) \to P(\R), \quad p(x) \mapsto \int_0^x p(t)\:dt.$$
- **Linear combination**: Given $\v_1, \dots, \v_n \in V$,
$$ T\colon \R^n \to V, \quad (\lambda_1, \dots, \lambda_n) \mapsto \lambda_1\v_1 + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n. $$
Note that if $\{\v_i\}$ is linearly independent, then this linear map is also injective.
Again, if $\{\v_i\}$ spans $V$, then this linear map is also surjective. Thus, $T$ is a linear bijection when we choose $\{\v_i\}$ as a basis of $V$.
- **Quotient**: Given a subspace $W\subseteq V$,
$$ Q\colon V \to V/W, \quad \v \mapsto [\v] = \v + W.$$
Note that $Q$ is surjective by construction.

Note that any linear combination of linear maps is also a linear map. This hints at the fact that the set of all linear maps between $V$ and $W$ forms a vector space of its own.

#### Rank and Nullity

Let $T\colon V\to W$ be a linear map. The *null space* or *kernel* of $T$ is the set of all vectors in $V$ which get mapped to $\ve0_W$. The *range* or *image* of $T$ is the set of all vectors in $W$ which have a pre-image in $V$.
$$ \begin{align}\kernel{T} &= \{\v \in V: T(\v) = \ve0_W\}, \\
\image{T} &= \{T(\v): \v \in V\}. \end{align} $$
It is easily verified that $\kernel{T}$ and $\image{T}$ are subspaces of $V$.

If $V$ is finite dimensional, we define the *nullity* of $T$ as the dimension of its kernel, and the *rank* of $T$ as the dimension of its image.

Note that if $T$ is injective, $\kernel{T} = \{\ve0_W\}$. Also, if $\kernel{T} = \{\ve0_W\}$, given any $\v_1, \v_2 \in V$ such that $T(\v_1) = T(\v_2)$, we have $T(\v_1 - \v_2) = \ve0$, which forces $\v_1 - \v_2 = \ve0_W$, *i.e.* $T$ is injective. Thus, a linear map is injective *iff* its nullity is zero.

#### Rank-Nullity Theorem
Let $V$ be a finite dimensional vector space and let $T\colon V\to W$ be a linear map. Then,
$$ \dim(V) = \dim(\image{T}) + \dim(\kernel{T}). $$
In other words, the dimension $n$ of $V$ is precisely the sum of the rank and nullity of $T$.

As a corollary, suppose that $\dim{V} = \dim{W}$, where $V$ is finite dimensional. Then, the linear map $T\colon V \to W$ is injective *iff* $T$ is surjective.

Consider a linear bijection $L\colon V \to V$. Note that the inverse map $L^{-1}$ is also linear. With this, we begin our proof of the theorem.

Let $k = \dim(\kernel{T}) \leq \dim(V) = n$, and let $\{\v_1, \dots \v_k\}$ be a basis of $\kernel{T}$. Using the Replacement Theorem, we extend this basis to of $V$, $\beta = \{\v_1, \dots, \v_k, \v_{k + 1}, \dots, \v_n\}$.
Note that $\{T(\v_{1}), \dots, T(\v_n)\}$ spans $\image{T}$. For $i = 1, \dots, k$, $T(\v_i) = \ve0$. Thus, we claim that $\{T(\v_{k + 1}), \dots, T(\v_n)\}$ is a basis of $\image{T}$. To do this, it is sufficient to show that this set is linearly independent. Suppose that for $\lambda_i \in F$,
$$ \lambda_{k + 1}T(\v_{k + 1}) + \dots + \lambda_nT(\v_n) = \ve0. $$
Using linearity, we see that $T(\sum {\lambda_i\v_i}) = \ve0$.
We thus find $\mu_1, \dots, \mu_k$ such that
$$ \lambda_{k + 1}\v_{k + 1} + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n = \ve0 = \mu_1\v_1 + \dots + \mu_k\v_k. $$
From the linear independence of $\beta$, we see that $\lambda_i = \mu_i = 0$, so the set $\{\v_{k + 1}, \dots, \v_{n}\}$ is linearly independent, hence a basis of $\image{T}$. Thus, $\dim(\image{T}) = n - k$, which proves the theorem.

#### Vector spaces of linear maps
We denote
$$ \L(V, W) = \{T\colon V \to W, T \text{ is a linear map}\}.$$
We also use the shorthand $\L(V, V) = \L(V)$.

It is easily seen that $\L(V, W)$ is a vector space, with the standard definitions of addition and scaling of functions. The zero map $\mathbb{O}$ is its additive identity.

> **Question**: What is the dimension of $\L(\R, \R^n)$?  
> *Response*: Consider $T \in \L(\R, \R^n)$. Since $\{1\}$ is a basis of $\R$, $T$ is fully determined by $T(1)$. Thus, we look at the evaluation map
$$ \ev\colon \L(\R, \R^n) \to \R^n, \quad T \mapsto T(1). $$
This is clearly a linear map. Furthermore, we note that $\ev$ is a bijection, since there is always a linear map $T$ such that $T(1) = \v$ given any $\v \in \R^n$, namely $T(\lambda) = \lambda\v$ for all $\lambda \in R$. Also, this is the only possible map because of the linearity of $T$. This means that $\ev^{-1}$ is also a linear bijection. Thus, we have an identification between elements of $\L(\R, \R^n)$ and $\R^n$, in the form of the *linear isomorphism* $\ev$. We will later see that this means $\dim\L(\R, \R^n) = n$.

#

> Note that we can similarly identify elements of $\L(\R^n, \R^m)$ with elements of $M_{m\times n}(\R)$.
 
### Linear isomorphisms
A *linear isomorphism* $T\colon V \to W$ is a linear map which is injective and surjective.

Two vector spaces are called *isomorphic* if there exists a linear isomorphism between them.

Note that isomorphism is an equivalence relation. Every vector space is isomorphic to itself (reflexivity), if $V$ is isomorphic to $W$, then $W$ is isomorphic to $V$ (symmetry), and if $V$, $W$ and $W$, $U$ are isomorphic, then so are $V$, $U$ (transitivity).
Thus, we can partition the set of all vector spaces over a field $F$ using this relation. We will see that vector spaces in the same equivalence class share the same dimension.

Let $T \in \L(V, W)$. If $\{\w_1, \dots, \w_n\} \subset W$ is linearly independent, and $T$ is surjective, with $T(\v_i) = \w_i$, then the set $\{\v_1, \dots, \v_n\}$ is also linearly independent.
If $\{\v_1, \dots, \v_n\} \subset V$ is linearly independent, and $T$ is injective with $T(\v_i) = \w_i$, then the set $\{\w_1, \dots, \w_n\}$ is linearly independent. Both follow immediately by applying the linearity of $T$ on the linear combinations $\sum \mu_i\v_i$ and $\sum \lambda_i\w_i$.

If $T$ is a linear isomorphism, and $\{\v_1, \dots, \v_n\}$ is a basis of $V$, then $\{\w_1, \dots, \w_n\}$ where $T(\v_i) = \w_i$ is a basis of $W$. The converse is also true, since $T^{-1}$ is also a linear isomorphism. Specifically, $\dim{V} = \dim{W}$, if either one has been shown to be finite dimensional.

#### Ordered Basis
Let $V$ be a finite dimensional vector space. An ordered basis of $V$ is a basis $\beta$ of $V$, endowed with a specific order.

We show that any two vector spaces of the same finite dimension (over the same field) are isomorphic. To prove this, suppose $V$ and $W$ have the same finite dimension $n$, and let $\beta = \{\v_1, \dots \v_n\}$ and $\gamma = \{\w_1, \dots, \w_n\}$ be ordered bases of them respectively.
Define the linear map $T\colon V \to W$ by first declaring $\v_i \mapsto \w_i$. Note that since we want $T$ to be linear, we also require
$$ \lambda_1\v_1 + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n \mapsto \lambda_1\w_1 + \dots + \lambda_n\w_n. $$
Note that this makes $T$ well-defined on $V$. This is because every vector in $V$ can be written as a linear combination of the basis vectors $\{\v_i\}$, and uniquely so. Again, $T$ is also surjective, since any vector in $W$ can be written as a linear combination of the basis vectors $\{\w_i\}$, so its pre-image in $V$ is the linear combination of the basis vectors $\{\v_i\}$ with the same coefficients. From the Rank-Nullity Theorem, we see that $T$ must also be injective. Thus, $T$ is a linear isomorphism.

As a corollary, any vector space $V$ of dimension $n$ over $\R$ is isomorphic to $\R^n$. If we choose the standard basis $\{\e_1, \dots, \e_n\}$ and an ordered basis $\beta = \{\v_1, \dots, \v_n\}$ of $V$, we see that
$$ T\colon \R^n \to V,\quad T(\lambda_1, \dots, \lambda_n) = \lambda_1\v_1 + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n $$
is a linear isomorphism.

Let $T\colon V\to W$ be a linear map. If we denote the range of $T$ as $\image{T}$, note that $T\colon V \to \image(T)$ is surjective. Denote the null space of $T$ as $\kernel{T}$.
Consider the map 
$$\T\colon V/\kernel{T} \to \image{T}, \quad [\v] \mapsto T(\v).$$
We see that this is well-defined. Note that $[\v_1] = [\v_2]$ *iff* $\v_1 - \v_2 \in N(T)$. This means that $T(\v_1 - \v_2) = \ve0$, so $\T[\v_1] - \T[\v_2] = \ve0$. All these implications were bidirectional, so we have also shown that $\T$ is injective. The surjectiveness of of $\T$ follows from the surjectiveness of $T$ by construction.
It also follows that $\T$ is linear, so $\T$ is a linear isomorphism.

If $V$ is finite dimensional, then $\image{T}$ is the span of $T(\v_i)$ for the finite basis $\{\v_i\}$ of $V$, so $\image{T}$ is also finite dimensional. As $\kernel{T}$ is a subspace of $V$, it is also finite dimensional. It can be shown that $\dim(V/\kernel{T}) = \dim(V) - \dim(\kernel{T})$. Thus, we obtain
$$ \dim(V) - \dim(\kernel{T}) = \dim(\image{T}). $$

> Note that $V/W$ can be finite dimensional even if $V$ and $W$ are not.
Consider $V = P(\R)$ and let $W \subset V$ be the set of polynomials with no constant term. Thus, each element of $V/W$ is of the form $[\lambda]$ for a constant $\lambda$, since all polynomials in $V$ having the same constant term are equivalent. Define
$$ T\colon V/W \to \R, \quad [p(x)] \mapsto p(0). $$
This map is well-defined and surjective, and we can show that this is a linear isomorphism. Thus, $V/W$ has a dimension of $1$.

#### Coordinate vectors
Given a finite dimensional vector space $V$ with an ordered basis $\beta = \{\v_1, \dots, \v_n\}$, we can uniquely write every $\v \in V$ as a linear combination $ \lambda_1\v_n + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n$. Then,
$$ [\v]^\beta = (\lambda_1 \; \dots \; \lambda_n)^T $$
is called the coordinate vector of $\v$ with respect to the ordered basis $\beta$.

#### Matrix representation
Let $T\colon V \to W$ be a linear map, and let $\beta = \{v_1, \dots, \v_n \}$ and $\gamma = \{\w_1, \dots, \w_m\}$ be ordered bases for $V$ and $W$ respectively. Note that
$$ T(\v_j) = \sum_{i = 1}^m a_{ij} \w_i, $$
for unique scalars $a_{ij}$. Thus, these scalars form an $m \times n$ matrix $A = [a_{ij}]$.

We seek a relationship between $[\v]^\beta$ and $[T\v]^\gamma$.
Suppose $\v = x_1\v_1 + \dots x_n\v_n$. Then,
$$
\begin{align}
T(\v) &= x_1T(\v_1) + \dots + x_nT(\v_n) \\
	&= \sum_{i}x_1a_{i1}\w_1 + \dots + \sum_{i}x_na_{in}\w_i \\
	&= \sum_{i, j}x_ja_{ij}\w_i.
\end{align}
$$
Therefore,
$$ [T\v]^\gamma = \left(\sum_{j}a_{1j}x_j\; \dots\; \sum_{j}a_{mj}x_j\right)^T = A[\v]^\beta. $$

We call the matrix $A$ the matrix representation of $T$ with respect to $\beta$ and $\gamma$. We write $A = [T]_\beta^\gamma$. Thus,
$$ [T\v]^\gamma \;=\; [T]_\beta^\gamma\,[\v]^\beta. $$
Note that 
$$ [T]_\beta^\gamma \;=\; \Big(\;[T\v_1]_\gamma \quad\cdots\quad [T\v_n]_\gamma\;\Big). $$
By convention, if $\beta = \gamma$, we simply write $[T]_\beta^\gamma = [T]_\beta$.

For example, the identity map $\Id\colon V \to V$, where $\beta = \{\v_1, \dots, \v_n\}$ is an ordered basis of $V$, has the matrix representation $I_n$ which is simply the $n \times n$ identity matrix.

Suppose $T\colon V \to V$ for some finite dimensional vector space $V$.
We choose a basis $\{\v_1, \dots \v_k\}$ of the null space $\kernel{T}$.
We extend this to an ordered basis $\beta = \{\v_1, \dots, \v_k, \v_{k + 1}, \dots, \v_n\}$ of $V$. Set $\w_j = T(\v_j)$ for $j > k$. Thus, the set $L = \{\w_{k + 1}, \dots, \w_n\}$ is linearly independent. Indeed, $L$ is a basis of the range of $T$, *i.e.* $\image{T}$ which has dimension $n - k$. Thus, we extend this to the basis $\gamma = \{\w_1, \dots, \w_k, \w_{k + 1}, \dots, \w_n\}$ of $V$. Therefore, we obtain
$$ [T]_\beta^\gamma = \begin{pmatrix}0_{k\times k} & 0_{k\times(n - k)} \\
0_{(n-k)\times k} & I_{n-k}\end{pmatrix}.$$

It can be shown that the space $\L(V, W)$ is isomorphic to $M_{m\times n}(F)$, where $V$ and $W$ are finite dimensional vector spaces. Simply consider the map
$$ \Phi\colon\L(V, W) \to M_{m\times n}(F), \quad T \mapsto [T]_\beta^\gamma, $$
where $\beta$ and $\gamma$ are ordered bases of $V$ and $W$ respectively.

> **Question**: What is the matrix representation of the differentiation map,
$$ \mathscr{D}\colon P_3(\R) \to P_2(\R), \quad p \mapsto p', $$
under the standard bases $\beta = \{1, x, x^2, x^3\}$ and $\gamma = \{1, x, x^2\}$?  
> *Response*: It is easily seen that
$$ [\mathscr{D}]_\beta^\gamma = 
\begin{pmatrix}
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 2 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 3
\end{pmatrix}.$$
This is because $a + bx + cx^2 + dx^3 \mapsto b + 2cx + 3dx^2$.
Thus, $1 \mapsto \ve{0}$, $x \mapsto 1$, $x^2 \mapsto 2x$ and $x^3 \mapsto 3x^2$.

> By reshaping the differentiation map so that $\mathscr{D}\colon P_3(\R) \to P_3(\R)$, then $[\mathscr{D}]_\beta$ simply acquires an additional row  filled with zeros.
$$ [\mathscr{D}]_\beta = 
\begin{pmatrix}
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 2 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 3 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0
\end{pmatrix}.$$
Note that the determinant of $[\mathscr{D}]_\beta$ is zero, so $\mathscr{D}$ is not an isomorphism.

## Dual spaces
Let $V$ be a vector space over $\R$. The *dual* of $V$, denoted as $V^*$, is defined to be $\L(V, \R)$.

Note that if $V$ is finite dimensional, then the dimensions of $V$ and $V^*$ are the same.

> Consider a linear map $T\colon \R^n \to \R$. Suppose $T(\e_i) = \lambda_i$. Then,
$$ T(\v) = v_1T(\e_1) + \dots + v_nT(\e_n) = \lambda_1v_1 + \dots + \lambda_nv_n. $$
Thus, we can identify $V$ with the vector $\Lambda = (\lambda_1, \dots, \lambda_n)$. This defines a map from $(\R^n)^*$ to $\R^n$.

> Define the projection maps
$$ T_i\colon \R^n \to \R, \quad (v_1, \dots, v_n) \mapsto v_i. $$
Thus,
$$ T(\v) = \lambda_1v_1 + \dots + \lambda_nv_n = \lambda_1T_1(\v) + \dots + \lambda_nT_n(\v). $$
Thus, $\{T_1, \dots, T_n\}$ forms a basis of $(\R^n)^*$. The elements of this space are called *covectors* or *linear functionals*.

#

> Choose an ordered basis $\beta = \{\v_1, \dots, \v_n\}$ of $\v$. Define the linear maps
$$ \v_i^*\colon V \to \R, \quad \lambda_1\v_1 + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n \mapsto \lambda_i. $$
It can be shown that $\beta^* = \{\v_1^*, \dots, \v_n^*\}$ is a basis of $V^*$. This is because for arbitrary $\v^* \in V$, pick $\v = \lambda_1\v_1 + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n$. Since $\lambda_i = \v_i^*\v$, we have
$$ \v^*\v = \lambda_1\v^*\v_1 + \dots + \lambda_n\v^*\v_n = (\v^*\v_1)\v_1^*\v + \dots + (\v^*\v_n)\v_n^*\v. $$
Thus, $\v^*$ is a linear combination of $\{\v_i^*\}$, with coefficients $\mu_i = \v^*\v_i$.
$$ \v^* = \mu_1\v_1^* + \dots + \mu_n\v_n^*. $$
Note that $\v_i^*\v_j = \delta_{ij}$.

#

Consider the linear map
$$ T_\beta\colon V \to V^*, \quad \lambda_1\v_1 + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n \mapsto \lambda_1\v_1^* + \dots + \lambda_n\v_n^*. $$ 
It can be shown that this is a linear isomorphism.

> Suppose $V = \R^n$. Define
$$ \v^*\colon\R^n \to \R, \quad \w \mapsto \v\cdot\w = \sum v_iw_i. $$
It is easily verified that $\v^*$ is a linear map. Thus, all $\v^*$ for all $\v$ are dual vectors of $\R^n$.

#

> Suppose $V$ is the set of all continuous functions $f\colon [0, 2\pi] \to \R$. Consider the linear maps
$$ S_n\colon V \to \R, \quad f\mapsto \frac{1}{2\pi}\int_0^{2\pi} f(t)\sin{nt}\:dt, $$
$$ C_n\colon V \to \R, \quad f\mapsto \frac{1}{2\pi}\int_0^{2\pi} f(t)\cos{nt}\:dt. $$
These numbers, $\{C_n(f), S_n(f)\}_{n \in \Z}$, are called the *Fourier coefficients* of $f$.

#

> Suppose $V = P_1(\R)$. Consider the linear maps
$$ f_1\colon V \to \R, \quad p \mapsto \int_0^1 p(t)\:dt, $$
$$ f_2\colon V \to \R, \quad p \mapsto \int_0^2 p(t)\:dt. $$
Note that $\{1, x\}$ is a basis of $P_1(\R)$. Now, $f_1(1) = 1$, $f_1(x) = 1/2$, $f_2(1) = 2$, $f_2(x) = 2$.

> We claim that $\{f_1, f_2\}$ is a basis of $V^*$. It suffices to show that $f_1$ and $f_2$ are linearly independent. Suppose $af_1 + bf_2 = 0$ for scalars $a, b$.
Evaluating the left hand side on the basis vectors $\{1, x\}$, we see that $a + 2b = 0$ and $a/2 + 2b = 0$, from which is follows that $a, b = 0$. This proves our claim.

> **Question**: Is there a basis $\{p_1, p_2\}$ of $P_1(\R)$ such that $\{f_1, f_2\}$ is the dual basis?  
> *Response*: We seek $p_1 = a + bx$, $p_2 = c + dx$ such that $p_1^* = f_1$ and $p_2^* = f_2$. This means that $f_ip_j = \delta_{ij}$. This requires
$$ a + b/2 = 1, \quad 2a + 2b = 0, \quad c + d/2 = 0, \quad 2c + 2d = 1. $$
This gives $p_1 = 2 - 2x$ and $p_2 = -1/2 + x$. This is indeed the required basis of $P_1(\R)$.

Let $T\colon V \to W$ be a linear map. We define its *dual* $T^*$, such that 
$$ T^*\colon W^* \to V^*, \quad L \mapsto L\circ T. $$
It is easily verified that $T^*$ is linear.

Consider $V^{**} = (V^*)^* = \L(\L(V, \R), \R)$, the *double dual* of $V$. Each of its elements is the linear map $L\colon V^* \to \R$. For example, let $\v \in V$. The evaluation map $\ev_\v\colon V^* \to \R, T \mapsto T(\v)$ is an element of the double dual of $V$.

> Consider the evaluation map
$$ \Phi\colon V \to V^{**}, \quad \v \mapsto \ev_\v. $$
When $V$ is finite dimensional, $\Phi$ is a linear isomorphism.
Thus, there is a way of identifying elements $\v \in V$ with the elements of the double dual

