# Analysis I
$
\newcommand\R{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand\Q{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand\Z{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand\N{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand\ve[1]{\boldsymbol{#1}}
\newcommand\norm[1]{\left\Vert #1 \right\Vert}
\def\u{\ve{u}}
\def\v{\ve{v}}
\def\w{\ve{w}}
$

## Point set topology on $\R$
We define *open* and *closed intervals* as follows.
$$ (a, b) = \{x \in \R: a < x < b\}, $$
$$ [a, b] = \{x \in \R: a \leq x \leq b\}. $$

An *$n$-cell* is the Cartesian product of $n$ closed intervals.

A *metric space* is a set $M$ with a metric or a distance function $d\colon M\times M \to \R$ such that for all $x, y, z \in M$,

- **Symmetry**: $d(x, y) = d(y, x)$,
- **Non-negativity**: $d(x, y) \geq 0$. Equality *iff* $x = y$.
- **Triangle inequality**: $d(x, z) \leq d(x, y) + d(y, z)$.

An *open ball* of radius $r$ in a metric space $(M, d)$ centred at a point $x$ is the set of all $y$ such that $d(x, y) < r$. This is denoted as $B_r(x)$.  
A *closed ball* of radius $r$ in a metric space $(M, d)$ centred at a point $x$ is the set of all $y$ such that $d(x, y) \leq r$.

An open ball $B_r(x)$ is also called a neighbourhood $N_r(x)$ of $x$.

A *convex set* $E$ is such that for any $x, y \in E$,
$$ tx + (1 - t)y \in E, $$
for all $t \in [0, 1]$. Open balls, closed balls, and $n$-cells are all convex sets.

A *bounded set* $S \subseteq M$ is such that there exists $x \in M$ and some radius $r > 0$ where $S \subseteq B_r(x)$.

A point $\ell \in M$ is a *closure point* of $S \subseteq \R$ if every neighbourhood of $\ell$ contains at least one point of $S$. The set of all closure points of $S$ is called its *closure*, denoted by $\bar{S}$.
A *closed set* is such that $S = \bar{S}$.

A subset $S$ of a metric space is *dense* in $M$ if $\bar{S} = M$.

A *limit point* $\ell$ of $S \subseteq M$ is such that every neighbourhood of $\ell$ contains at least one point of $S$ different from itself.
Every closure point of $S$ which is not a limit point of $S$ is called an *isolated point*.

> Note that every neighbourhood of a limit point of $S$ contains infinitely many points of $S$.
> Suppose $\ell$ is a limit point of $S$, and suppose that the neighbourhood $N$ of $\ell$ contains finitely many points in $S$ apart from $\ell$. Thus, we can enumerate $(N\cap S)\setminus\{\ell\} = \{s_1, \dots, s_n\}$. Note that if $d(s, \ell) > d(s_i, \ell)$, the neighbourhood $N_{r_i}(\ell)$ does not contain $s$, where $r_i = d(s_i, \ell)$. Thus, by setting
$$ r = \min d(s_i, \ell) > 0,$$
the neighbourhood $N_r(\ell)$ contains none of $s_i$. This is a contradiction.

# 

>  As a corollary, finite subsets of a metric space have no limit points.  

An *interior point* $p \in S$ is such that for some $r > 0$, there is a neighbourhood $B_r(p) \subseteq S$. The set of all interior points of $S$ is called its *interior*, denoted by $S^0$.
An *open set* is such that $S = S^0$.

> Note that every neighbourhood is an open set.

The *boundary* $\partial S$ of $S$ is the set of all points in its closure not in its interior. Thus, $\partial S = \bar{S} \setminus S^0$.

A set $S$ is open *iff* its complement is closed. As a corollary, a set is closed *iff* its complement is open.

#### De Morgan's Laws
Let $S$ be a set and let $E_i$ be subsets of $S$. Then,
$$ \left(\bigcup E_i \right)^c = \bigcap E_i^c\, \quad\quad \left(\bigcap E_i \right)^c = \bigcup E_i^c. $$

Let $\{\mathcal{O}_i\}$ be a collection of open sets. Then, $\cup_i \mathcal{O}_i$ is open.
It immediately follows that the complement $\cap_i \mathcal{O}_i^c$ is closed.

Let $\{\mathcal{C}_i\}$ be a collection of closed sets. Then, $\cap_i \mathcal{C}_i$ is closed. Note that this follows since the complement $\cup_i \mathcal{C}_i^c$ is open (remember that $\mathcal{C}_i^c$ are all open).

Let $\{\mathcal{O}_i\}$ be a *finite* collection of open sets. Then, $\cap_i \mathcal{O}_i$ is open.

> For infinitely many open sets, consider $\mathcal{O}_n = (-1/n, 1/n)$ for $n \in \N$.

Let $\{\mathcal{C}_i\}$ be a *finite* collection of closed sets. Then, $\cup_i \mathcal{C}_i$ is closed.

Let $S\subseteq\R$ be closed. Then, if $S$ is bounded above, it has a maximum. If it is bounded below, it has a minimum.

### Compact sets
Let $(M, d)$ be a metric space and let $S \subset M$. Then $T \subseteq S$ is open in $S$ *iff* $T = S \cap A$ is open for some open subset $A$ of $M$.

An *open cover* of $S \subseteq M$ is a collection of open subsets of $M$ whose union is $S$.

A subset $K \subseteq M$ is called *compact* if every open cover of $K$ contains a finite subcover. For example, any finite set is compact.

Let $S \subset M$. A set $K \subseteq S$ is compact in $S$ *iff* $K$ is compact in $M$.

> Recall that the same does not hold for openness. For example, $\R$ is open in $\R$, but not in $\R^2$.

All compact subsets of a metric space are closed. Suppose $K \subseteq M$ be compact. If $K$ is not closed, there is some $x \in K^c$ such that $x$ is a limit point of $K$. Construct the open cover of $K$ with open balls $B(k, r_k)$ centred at $k$, of radius $r_k = d(x, k)/2$ for all $k \in K$. Note that an open ball $B(x, r_k)$ of the same radius centred at $x$ is disjoint from the first ball. From the compactness of $K$, the cover $\{B(k, r_k)\}_{n \in K}$ has a finite subcover. Take the intersection of all the open balls $B(x, r_k)$ in this finite subcover. This is a neighbourhood of $x$ which contains no element of $K$, which is a contradiction.

All closed subsets of compact spaces are compact.

The intersection of a closed set and a compact set is compact.

For any collection of compact subsets of $\{K_j\}$ such that the intersection of any finite sub-collection is nonempty, the intersection of all of them is also nonempty.

Given a collection of closed intervals $\{I_j\}$ in $\R$ such that $I_{n + 1} \subseteq I_n$ for all $n \in \N$, the intersection of all of them is nonempty. The same holds even if $\{I_j\}$ are a collection of $n$-cells.

Every infinite subset of a compact set $K$ has a limit point in $K$.

Every $n$-cell is compact.

#### Bolzano-Weierstrass Theorem
Every bounded infinite subset of $\R^n$ has a limit point in $\R^n$.

To prove this, given an infinite bounded subset $S \subseteq \R^n$, we construct an $n$-cell $I$ around it, so $S \subset I$. Now, $I$ is compact, so $S$ must have a limit point in $I$, hence a limit point in $\R^n$.