# Analysis I

#### Course Content
1. Real Numbers
2. Sequences and Series
3. Point-set Topology on $\mathbb{R}$
4. Limits
5. Continuity $
\newcommand\R{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand\Q{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand\Z{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand\N{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand\ve[1]{\boldsymbol{#1}}
\newcommand\norm[1]{\left\Vert #1 \right\Vert}
\def\u{\ve{u}}
\def\v{\ve{v}}
\def\w{\ve{w}}
$

## Groups, Rings and Fields
A *binary operation* $f$ on a set $S$ is a mapping $f\colon S\times S \to S$.

A group $G$ is a set with a binary operation $*$ which satisfies the following axioms.

- **Associativity**: $a * (b * c) = (a * b) * c$ for all $a, b, c \in G$.
- **Identity**: There exists an element $i_G \in G$ such that $a * i_G = a$ for all $a \in G$.
- **Inverse**: For every $a \in G$, there exists $b \in G$ such that $a * b = i_G$.

A structure $(G, *)$ which only satisfies *associativity* is called a *semigroup*. A semigroup with an *identity* element is called a *monoid*.

An *abelian group* also satisfies the axiom of *commutativity*.

- **Commutativity**: $a * b = b * a$ for all $a, b \in G$.

A *ring* is a set $R$ with two binary operations $+$ and $\times$ (addition and multiplication) such that $(R, +)$ is an abelian group, $(R, \times)$ is a monoid and $\times$ is distributive over $+$.

- **Distributivity**: $a \times (b + c) = (a \times b) + (a \times c)$ and $(b + c) \times a = (b \times a) + (c \times a)$ for all $a, b, c \in R$.

The additive and multiplicative identities of $R$ are denoted by $0_R$ and $1_R$ respectively.

If $\times$ is commutative, $(R, +, \times)$ is called a *commutative ring*.

A *field* $F$ is a commutative ring such that the non-zero elements form an abelian group under multiplication.

An *ordered field* $F$ is also an ordered set such that for all $a, b, c \in F$,

- If $a > b$, then $a + c > b + c$.
- If $a > 0$ and $b > 0$, then $ab > 0$.

> The ordered field $\Z/p\Z$ is an important example. Not that $\Z/n\Z$ are *not* fields in general.

#

> **Question**: Can a nontrivial finite abelian group be ordered?  
> *Response*: No. Let $(G, +)$ be a group with $n > 1$ elements, and select two members such that $a > b$. We thus have the chain of terms
$$ nb < a + (n-1)b < 2a + (n-2)b + \dots + (n-1)a + b < na. $$
Thus, we have generated $n+1$ distinct elements in $G$, which is a contradiction!  
> Note that we simply denote $na = \underbrace{a + \dots + a}_{n \text{ times}}$.

## Real Numbers
The real numbers are a *complete, ordered field*.

### Constructing $\sqrt{2}$

The irrational number $\sqrt{2}$ can be approximated by the rationals with arbitrary precision. This is done iteratively, using the *AM-GM-HM* inequality to generate sequences of rationals converging to $\sqrt{2}$.
We define the sequences
$\{u_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$ and $\{l_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$ as follows.
$$ u_0 = 2, \quad\quad l_0 = 1. $$
$$ u_{n+1} = \frac{u_n + l_n}{2}, \quad\quad l_{n+1} = \frac{2}{\frac{1}{u_n} + \frac{1}{l_n}}. $$

Note that $u_{n+1}l_{n+1} = u_nl_n$, so $u_nl_n = 2$. Thus, $u_{n+1} > \sqrt{2} > l_{n+1}$ by $AM > GM > HM$. Also, $u_{n+1} < u_n$ and $l_{n+1} > l_n$, so by iterating successively over $n$, we construct the sequence of rational numbers
$$ u_0 > u_1 > \dots > u_n > u_{n+1} > \sqrt{2} > l_{n+1} > l_n > \dots > l_1 > l_0. $$

To put strict bounds on our approximation, we calculate the difference $R_{n+1} = u_{n+1} - l_{n+1}$.
$$ R_{n+1} = u_{n+1} - l_{n+1} = \frac{u_n + l_n}{2} - \frac{2u_nl_n}{u_n + l_n} = \frac{(u_n - l_n)^2}{2(u_n + l_n)}.$$

Since $u_n + l_n > 2l_0 = 2$, we have $R_{n+1} < R_{n}^2 / 4$. Also, $u_n - l_n < u_0 - l_0 = 1$, so $R_{n + 1}/R_{n} < 1/4$. Thus, $R_n \to 0$ as $n \to \infty$, so we can approximate $\sqrt{2}$ with arbitrary precision.
Indeed, after $n$ iterations of this algorithm, the error is at most $1/4^n$.

### Properties of real numbers

These two properties follow from the fact that $\R$ is an *ordered set*.

- **Trichotomy**: Exactly one of the following is true for all $x, y \in \R$: $x < y$, $x = y$, $x > y$.
- **Transitivity**: If $a > b$ and $b > c$, then $a > c$ for all $a, b, c \in \R$.

The real numbers are also *complete*, *i.e.*, $\R$ has the *least upper bound* property.

- **Least Upper Bound**: An ordered set $S$ has the least upper bound property if $\sup E$ exists for every non-empty subset $E \subseteq S$ which is bounded above.
- **Greatest Lower Bound**: An ordered set $S$ has the greatest lower bound property if $\inf E$ exists for every non-empty subset $E \subseteq S$ which is bounded below.

These two properties are equivalent. Let $S$ have the least upper bound property, and let $E \subseteq S$ be bounded below. Let $L$ be the set of all lower bounds of $L$. Then $L \neq \emptyset$, and every element of $E$ is an upper bound of $L$. Also, from the least upper bound property of $S$, $\sup L$ must exist in $S$.
Note that for all $s \in S$, if $s < \sup L$, then there exists $l \in L, l > s$ so $s$ is not an upper bound of $L$, hence $s \notin E$.
The contrapositive of this is that for every $s \in E$, we must have $s \geq \sup L$. This means that $\sup L$ is a lower bound of $E$, so $\sup L \in L$.
Also, $\sup L$ is an upper bound of $L$, so $y \leq \sup L$ for all $y \in L$.
This means that $\sup L \geq y$ for all lower bounds $y\in L$ of $E$.
Thus, $\inf E = \sup L$ for all non-empty $E \subseteq S$ bounded below, so $S$ also has the greatest lower bound property. 
The converse follows similarly.

Note that $\R$ contains $\Q$ as a subfield. The rationals $\Q$ do *not*
have the least upper bound property. For example, the set $\{x\in\Q: x^2 < 2\}$ may have upper bounds in $\Q$, but has no *least* upper bound in $\Q$.

- **$\Z$ is unbounded in $\R$**: To prove this, assume to the contrary that $\Z$ in bounded in $\R$. Then, $\Z$ has a supremum in $\R$, say $\alpha = \sup \Z$. Now, $\alpha - 1/2$ is not an upper bound of $\Z$, so there exists $n \in Z$ such that $\alpha - 1/2 \le n$. This means that $\alpha < n + 1 \in \Z$, which is a contradiction.
- **Archimedean property**: For all $x, y \in R$, $x \neq 0$, there exists $n \in \N$ such that $nx > y$. Note that if this was false, then $y/x$ would be an upper bound of $\Z$, which is a contradiction.
- **$\Q$ is dense in $\R$**: Between any two distinct real numbers, there exists a rational number. Let $x, y \in \R$ with $x < y$. We find $n \in \Z$ such that $n(y - x) > 1$. Note that $n \neq 0$. We find the smallest integer $m \in \Z$ such that
$nx < m$. Thus, $m - 1 \leq nx < m$. Using $1 + nx < ny$, we have $nx < m \leq 1 + nx < ny$, so $x < m/n < y$ as desired.
- **Existence and Uniqueness of positive $n^\text{th}$ roots**: For every positive integer $n$ and every positive real number $x$, there exists a unique positive real number $y$ such that $y^n = x$.

### Extended real numbers system
We introduce two new symbols $\infty$ and $-\infty$ to $\R$. Preserving the original order,
$$ -\infty < x < \infty $$
for all $x \in \R$. We also define the following conventions.

- $x + \infty = \infty$, $x - \infty = -\infty$.
- $x / \pm\infty = 0$.
- If $x > 0$, $x \cdot \infty = \infty$. If $x < 0$, then $x \cdot \infty = -\infty$.

## Point set topology on $\R$
We define *open* and *closed intervals* as follows.
$$ (a, b) = \{x \in \R: a < x < b\}, $$
$$ [a, b] = \{x \in \R: a \leq x \leq b\}. $$

An *$n$-cell* is the Cartesian product of $n$ closed intervals.

A *metric space* is a set $M$ with a metric or a distance function $d\colon M\times M \to \R$ such that for all $x, y, z \in M$,

- **Symmetry**: $d(x, y) = d(y, x)$,
- **Non-negativity**: $d(x, y) \geq 0$. Equality *iff* $x = y$.
- **Triangle inequality**: $d(x, z) \leq d(x, y) + d(y, z)$.

An *open ball* of radius $r$ in a metric space $(M, d)$ centred at a point $x$ is the set of all $y$ such that $d(x, y) < r$. This is denoted as $B_r(x)$.  
A *closed ball* of radius $r$ in a metric space $(M, d)$ centred at a point $x$ is the set of all $y$ such that $d(x, y) \leq r$.

An open ball $B_r(x)$ is also called a neighbourhood $N_r(x)$ of $x$.

A *convex set* $E$ is such that for any $x, y \in E$,
$$ tx + (1 - t)y \in E, $$
for all $t \in [0, 1]$. Open balls, closed balls, and $n$-cells are all convex sets.

A *bounded set* $S \subseteq M$ is such that there exists $x \in M$ and some radius $r > 0$ where $S \subseteq B_r(x)$.

A point $\ell \in M$ is a *closure point* of $S \subseteq \R$ if every neighbourhood of $\ell$ contains at least one point of $S$. The set of all closure points of $S$ is called its *closure*, denoted by $\bar{S}$.
A *closed set* is such that $S = \bar{S}$.

A subset $S$ of a metric space is *dense* in $M$ if $\bar{S} = M$.

A *limit point* $\ell$ of $S \subseteq M$ is such that every neighbourhood of $\ell$ contains at least one point of $S$ different from itself.
Every closure point of $S$ which is not a limit point of $S$ is called an *isolated point*.

> Note that every neighbourhood of a limit point of $S$ contains infinitely many points of $S$.
> Suppose $\ell$ is a limit point of $S$, and suppose that the neighbourhood $N$ of $\ell$ contains finitely many points in $S$ apart from $\ell$. Thus, we can enumerate $(N\cap S)\setminus\{\ell\} = \{s_1, \dots, s_n\}$. Note that if $d(s, \ell) > d(s_i, \ell)$, the neighbourhood $N_{r_i}(\ell)$ does not contain $s$, where $r_i = d(s_i, \ell)$. Thus, by setting
$$ r = \min d(s_i, \ell) > 0,$$
the neighbourhood $N_r(\ell)$ contains none of $s_i$. This is a contradiction.

# 

>  As a corollary, finite subsets of a metric space have no limit points.  

An *interior point* $p \in S$ is such that for some $r > 0$, there is a neighbourhood $B_r(p) \subseteq S$. The set of all interior points of $S$ is called its *interior*, denoted by $S^0$.
An *open set* is such that $S = S^0$.

> Note that every neighbourhood is an open set.

The *boundary* $\partial S$ of $S$ is the set of all points in its closure not in its interior. Thus, $\partial S = \bar{S} \setminus S^0$.

A set $S$ is open *iff* its complement is closed. As a corollary, a set is closed *iff* its complement is open.

#### De Morgan's Laws
Let $S$ be a set and let $E_i$ be subsets of $S$. Then,
$$ \left(\bigcup E_i \right)^c = \bigcap E_i^c\, \quad\quad \left(\bigcap E_i \right)^c = \bigcup E_i^c. $$

Let $\{O_i\}$ be a collection of open sets. Then, $\cup_i O_i$ is open.
It immediately follows that the complement $\cap_i O_i^c$ is closed.

Let $\{C_i\}$ be a collection of closed sets. Then, $\cap_i C_i$ is closed. Note that this follows since the complement $\cup_i C_i^c$ is open (remember that $C_i^c$ are all open).

Let $\{O_i\}$ be a *finite* collection of open sets. Then, $\cap_i O_i$ is open.

> For infinitely many open sets, consider $O_n = (-1/n, 1/n)$ for $n \in \N$.

Let $\{C_i\}$ be a *finite* collection of closed sets. Then, $\cup_i C_i$ is closed.

Let $S\subseteq\R$ be closed. Then, if $S$ is bounded above, it has a maximum. If it is bounded below, it has a minimum.